<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epigraph</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="epigraph" epub:type="epigraph">
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Child of the pure unclouded brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreaming eyes of wonder!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though time be fleet, and I and thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are half a life asunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy loving smile will surely hail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love-gift of a fairy-tale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I have not seen thy sunny face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor heard thy silver laughter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No thought of me shall find a place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thy young life’s hereafter⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough that now thou wilt not fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To listen to my fairy-tale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A tale begun in other days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When summer suns were glowing⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A simple chime, that served to time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rhythm of our rowing⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose echoes live in memory yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though envious years would say “forget.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come, hearken then, ere voice of dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bitter tidings laden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall summon to unwelcome bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A melancholy maiden!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are but older children, dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fret to find our bedtime near.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Without, the frost, the blinding snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The storm-wind’s moody madness⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within, the firelight’s ruddy glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And childhood’s nest of gladness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The magic words shall hold thee fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt not heed the raving blast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And though the shadow of a sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May tremble through the story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For “happy summer days” gone by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vanish’d summer glory⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It shall not touch with, breath of bale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pleasance of our fairy-tale.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
